Granny Smith apples are a crisp, tart apple that make a delicious snack or a tasteful addition to recipes. Because these green apples are have a higher acid content than other apples, they take longer to go brown once you cut into them. Toss diced Granny Smith apples into salads or stir them into your oatmeal at breakfast. Caramelize chopped Granny Smith apples with a touch of butter and cinnamon to make a warm topping for frozen yogurt. No matter how you enjoy these tart green apples, your body will reap a nutritional harvest of benefits.
Sponsored Link
5) Foods To Never Eat
See the 5 foods you should never eat if you want to lose belly fat.
perfectorigins.com?/?5Foods.php
Antioxidants
Apples are the main source of flavonoids in the Western diet and they are rich in vitamin C, explains Dr. Silvina Lotito, a research associate with the Linus Pauling Institute. Granny Smith apples are particularly high in the flavonoids cyanidin and epicatechin, although Red Delicious has more. Vitamin C and flavonoids act as antioxidants in your system and neutralize harmful free radicals. Having an abundance of free radicals roaming through your body leads to permanent damage of healthy cells and increases your risk of chronic diseases. Powerful antioxidants from Granny Smith apples lessen your risk of heart disease, diabetes and stroke.
Weight Loss
Granny Smith apples make a guilt-free addition to your weight-loss efforts. They are naturally low in calories, providing a minimal 80 calories for a medium 3-inch piece of fruit. The high fiber content of Granny Smith apples further helps your weight-loss goals by improving satiety. Soluble fiber, which comes from the soft inside part of the apple, attracts water in your intestinal tract. It forms a gel-like substance, which slows digestion and forces food to back up into your stomach. You may feel full for an extended period of time if you snack on a Granny Smith apple in the afternoon or enjoy one right before a meal.
Regulated Blood Sugar
Granny Smith apples can help stabilize your blood sugar levels, which is particularly important if you have diabetes or are at risk of developing diabetes. Foods rich in soluble fiber delay absorption of sugar in your small intestine and may lower your risk of developing Type 2 diabetes. Women who eat an apple a day are nearly 30 percent less likely to develop Type 2 diabetes, "Best Health Magazine" reports. Make sure you meet your daily fiber recommendation for maximum benefits. You need 14 grams of fiber for every 1,000 calories in your diet, which amounts to 28 daily grams for an average 2,000-calorie diet, according to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2010. A medium 3-inch Granny Smith apple provides about 5 grams of dietary fiber.
Healthy Teeth
If you can't brush your teeth after a meal, reach for a Granny Smith apple. Biting and chewing the tough, fibrous skin of the apple stimulates saliva production. The extreme tartness of Granny Smith apples aids in more salivation than a sweeter type of apple. High levels of saliva decrease bacteria in your mouth that attack teeth and cause cavities. Granny Smith apples are high in acid, which can break down tooth enamel. As a precaution, drink a glass of water with your apple to minimize any damage from acid.
Steady Heart Rhythm
Granny Smith apples have a slightly higher potassium content than other types of apples. Potassium is an electrolyte that keeps fluid balanced in and around cells. This process is vital to everyday electrical flow through your body, a function that makes your heart beat. If you don't get enough potassium each day, you may wind up having an irregular heartbeat. You need 4,700 milligrams of potassium each day, according to the Linus Pauling Institute. A 100-gram Granny Smith apple, which is equivalent to about 3 1/2 ounces, provides 115 milligrams of potassium.
Sponsored Links
Boost Testosterone 40+
One fast and easy way to boost your body's free testosteronewww.nugenix.com
2014 Top Wrinkle Creams
5 Best Wrinkle Creams Reviewed. Results Without Surgery or Needles!www.iskincarereviews.com
1 Rule of a Flat Stomach:
Cut down a bit of stomach fat every day by using this 1 weird old tip.realdosefatloss.com
Aspartame
Facts On Aspartame & Health from the Experts at FamilyDoctor.Org.www.familydoctor.org