Which is Healthier? Green or Red Apples?
This entry was posted on December 3, 2013, in Beauty Foods, Food, Food and Nutrition and tagged Granny Smith Apples, green apple recipe, green apples, Green apples are better for you. Bookmark the permalink.	6 Comments
Here’s the deal. I’ll be honest with you, I like red apples. I like their sweetness and their flavor. BUT! I consume green apples on a daily basis. You might think it’s silly that the color on the outside of the apple matters when the inside is basically the same exact shade! Well, that’s a pretty logical view point, I suppose, but green apples are really packed with more nutrients and more health benefits than their red counterparts.

Granny smith apples have a higher nutrient density than any red apples! Be sure to grab some organic green apples!

Granny smith apples have a higher nutrient density than any red apples! Be sure to grab some organic green apples!
Green (Granny Smith) apples have:

Less sugar
More fiber
Higher antioxidant levels
More anti-aging and beauty benefits
More vitamins
than red apples.

"Apple Picking" organic Granny Smith apples!
“Apple Picking” organic Granny Smith apples!
One of the amazing things about the green apple is its ability to keep digestive and filter organs in tip-top shape. Eating green apples daily can help to reverse the effects of past drinking on the liver, prevent colon cancer, AND prevent gallbladder and kidney stones! Not enough to brave the sour taste? Ok, what about this, then? Many commercial cosmetic products (particularly those that advertise anti-aging benefits) contain green apples for their high vitamin content and their immense skin benefits. People who consume green apples regularly tend to have smoother, blemish-free skin!

Here’s the thing about apples. All apples – red, green, or yellow – need to be organic. Sadly, apples are not only on the now-famous “dirty dozen” list of fruits and veggies most affected by pesticides, but they are really at the top of that list. Their skins are so thin and the core and stem so absorbent that no amount of washing and peeling can get rid of those nasty pesticides. The whole fruit absorbs them like a sponge.

If you really cannot stand the flavor and taste of little green apples, do what I do. Snack on the red ones and use the green ones in a nutrient-dense “beauty drink.” If you’ve tried my Beauty Cleanse, you’ll know all about this drink. While the specific ingredients can change day to day I almost always use kale, spinach, green apple, and a banana along with several other green and sometimes dark red (think pomegranates) veggies and fruits. I don’t juice these ingredients, as one would expect, because most of the fiber (which is great for you and fills you up) is lost that way. No, I chop everything up to small chunks and blend it all with filtered water so I can sip every ounce of fiber, protein, and vitamins that all these ingredients have to offer. Waste not, want not I say.

Beauty Drink!
Beauty Drink!
So the next time you’re shopping for apples don’t just rush to the sweet red ones. Stop by the green ones and ask yourself, “How ’bout them apples?”

Like58  
PrintEmailFacebookTwitterGoogle+PocketDiggRedditTumblrStumbleUponWordPressLinkedInPinterest
6 thoughts on “Which is Healthier? Green or Red Apples?”

Joe says:
February 14, 2014 at 11:38 am
Thanks for the tip. It probably is worth point out to you, though, that when you blend your fruits & apples you loose the fibre, thus creating a sugary nightmare for your health.

Reply
V Well Health says:
February 14, 2014 at 8:00 pm
Thanks for reading, Joe

Reply
John says:
March 13, 2014 at 3:43 pm
Joe,

Blending does not remove fiber. You may be thinking of juicing which leaves pulp behind to be discarded. If you blend fruits, you are consuming the entire item (just as if you were to eat it).

Best regards,

John

Reply
V Well Health says:
March 17, 2014 at 1:42 pm
John, that’s why I love blending!

Reply
Nancy says:
April 17, 2014 at 4:46 pm
True that blending / pureeing does not remove pulp but renders the fruit so that the sugars are quick to digest and absorb. The fiber, broken up too, is compromised to do its usual job of slowing absorption and preventing blood sugar spikes. It is a complete sugary nightmare, which is why it’s a good idea to add some fat and some protein to slow digestion of the sugars.

Reply
polash says:
May 21, 2014 at 8:16 pm
I always try to eat green ones.I also think the green one is more nutrious and tasty. Good tip though! Cheers!!