This month's notes: November 2014: Apples are still available!  Frosts and freezes have begun, so don't wait . Corn mazes and hayrides are still going in most places through the first week of November. Make your own homemade ice cream including low fat, low sugar and other flavors))  Have fun, eat healthier and better tasting, and save money by picking your own locally grown fruit and vegetables, and then using our easy canning and freezing directions

 Organic farms are identified in green!  See our guide to local fruit and vegetable festivals!. Please tell the farms you found them here - and ask them to update their information!!
   Subscribe to our: Email alerts;  Follow us on Twitter  Add this page to your favorites! - Email this page to a friend, or to yourself
Apple varieties - which apple to pick and why!
 2013 looks to have apples ripening on their normal schedule, and the excessive rain in many area is a mixed blessing: the apples become larger, but the water may dilute their flavor. No word yet on prices, but I expect most areas to see $14 to $30 a bushel, depending on variety! Scroll down the page to see the chart, or click here for a PDF print version. And for an explanation of why apple slices turn brown and how to stop it, see this page!  To see how to properly store apples for the winter, see this page!
Varieties which are exceptional for a trait are noted in the chart below (Best, very good, etc.). Varieties which are at least good and well-suited have an "X" in a column.  A blank box simply means that they are average for the quality. Ultimately, it is personal preference and cultural traditions. that often determines which varieties of apples are used for which purpose. That said, sweeter and softer apples make the best applesauce (like Gala), harder, drier apples are often used for baking and storing (like Rome and Arkansas Black), and tarter, more crisp and juicier apples are often eaten fresh (like Honeycrisp).
Name	Ripening Date
Dates are approximate and vary CONSIDERABLY with weather, location and more!	Eating fresh	Cooking	Apple Sauce	Apple Pie	Apple Juice	Apple
Butter	Storage
Gala appleGala	mid August to 
early September	Very 
good	X	BEST	X	X	X	Must refrigerate; even then only keeps for a few weeks
 Lodi	Mid July 	X 	 	GOOD 	 	 	 	Must Refrigerate 
 
Mollies_delicious appleMollies Delicious	
August	 	X  	 	 	 	 	Must Refrigerate
Jersey Mac apple Jersey Mac	August	X 	X 	 	 	 	 	OK 
Earligold apple Earligold
August	X 	X  	X  	X  	 	 	 Must Refrigerate
 Akane	August 	 	X 	 	 	 	 	 
Pau;a Red applePaulaRed	mid August to 
early September	X	X	X	X	 	X	 
SweeTango appleSweeTango 	mid August to 
early September	X	 	X	X	 	X	 
 McIntosh	September	X	 	good	 	X	X	 
 Ginger Gold  	September 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Honeycrisp	September	Very 
good	X	 good, but watery	X	BEST	X	 
Jonathon_appleJonathan	mid to late 
September	X	X	Very 
good	X	X	X	 
golden_delicious_appleGolden Delicious	mid to late 
September	X	X	Very 
good	X	X	X	 Should Refrigerate 
Ultra Gold	mid to late 
September
X	X	X	X	X	X	 
cortland_appleCortland	mid to late 
September
X	 	X	X	X	X	 
Jonalicious	mid to late 
September
X	X	Very 
good	X	X	X	 Must Refrigerate 
ambrosia appleAmbrosia 	mid to late 
September	X	X	good	X	X	X	 Should Refrigerate 
red_delicious_appleRed Delicious	mid to late 
September
X	 	good	 	 	X	 
Jonagold_appleJonagold	mid to late 
September 	X	 	Very 
good	 	X	 	 
Jubilee	Late September 
to early October
X	X	X	X	 	 	 
 Mutsu, also called Crispin  	Late September to 
early October
X	X	Very 
good	X	 	X	 
 keepsake appleKeepsake	Late September to 
early October
X	X	 	X	 	 	 
 Northern Spy appleNorthern Spy	Late September to 
early October	X	X	 	 	 	 	Very good for storing
 Shizuka appleShizuka	Late September to 
early October
X	X	X	X	X	X	 
Braeburn  	early to
Mid October 	X	X	X	X 	 	 	 
Cameo	early to
Mid October 	Very 
good	X	Very 
good	X 	 	X	 
Rome	early to
Mid October	 	X	 	X	 	 	 
 Sundance appleSundance	early to
Mid October	X	X	 	 	X	X	 
 Blushing Golden	early to
Mid October	X	X	 	X	X	X	 
stayman_apple Stayman  	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
 Enterprise appleEnterprise	early to
Mid October	X	X	 	 	 	 	 
melrose_appleMelrose	early to
Mid October	X	X	Very 
good	X	X	X	 
StaymanStayman Winesap

mid to late
October
X	X	good	 	X	 	 
grannysmith_appleGranny Smith	mid to late
October	X	X	 	 	X	 	 
Macoun	mid to late
October	X	X	 	 	 	 	 
 Liberty appleLiberty	mid to late
October	X	X	 	 	 	 	 
 Pink Lady	mid to late
October	X	X	good	X	X	X	 
 Jazz appleJazz 	early to
Mid October	X	X	Very 
good	X	X	X	 
 Suncrisp	mid to late
October	X	X	 	X	X	X	 
Yates appleYates	mid to late
October	X	X	 	X	X	 	Stores very well
fuji_appleFuji	mid to late
October	Very 
good	X	BEST	X	 	X	Great keeper; stores well in garage or basement
Black Twig apple Black Twig  	mid to late
October 	X	X	X	X	X	X	 
 Arkansas Black	mid to late
October	 	Baking	too hard	 	 	 	Great keeper
 
Of course, each region of the country and each season varies. Variations in rainfall and temperature greatly affect the usual ripening date. So call ahead!
Alphabetical List of American Apple Varieties and Characteristics 

 
 ambrosia appleAmbrosia
Sweet, crisp, aromatic flavour reminiscent of pear and low acidity.
Mostly red colouration, with yellow patches.
Flesh is cream-coloured, firm meat
Medium to large in size
Developed in British Columbia in the early 1990s.
Believed to be a cross of a Jonagold and Golden Delicious.
Ripens mid to late season
 Ashmead Kernal appleAshmead Kernal
A small heirloom apple, covered with a thick russet, often found in Virginia, originated in England around 1700 and was brought to the United States much later.
Very sweet and acidic
Ripens from late September into October
Arkansas Black
A medium to large apple
dark purple to almost black
Very, very hard texture and an excellent keeper.
Almost too hard-textured at harvest. Best after some storage time.
Great for baking; and terrible for applesauce
A Winesap type.
Late season
Baldwin
good quality large red apple
An old variety, subject to cold injury in the winter
late mid-season
medium sweet
 Blushing Golden
Medium-sized waxy coated modern yellow apple with a pink blush
Jonathan/Golden Delicious cross.
Firm flesh with flavor like Golden Delicious, but tarter.
Keeps well
Late season
Brae Burn
Rich red color with white flesh
Sweet
Best for eating
Late season
Cameo
A large, round sub-acid apple with red blush stripe over yellow.
Late ripening
Cortland
A Ben Davis/McIntosh cross
large flat, dull red apple with a purple hue and soft, white flesh
Less aromatic than McIntosh
Good keeper.
Very good in salads.
Mid season
Cox's Orange Pippin
Popular in English markets. 
Medium sized, golden yellow skin, with brownish orange
often russeted. 
Flesh tender, crisp, semi-tart
early
Crispin/Mutsu *
Light green to yellowish white
Sweet, rich, full flavor
Firm, dense texture
Best for: eating fresh
Mid - late season
Empire*
A McIntosh type apple
Long shelf life
Aromatic and crisp with creamy white juicy flesh.
Best for: eating fresh
Early - Mid season
 Enterprise appleEnterprise
Large, red apple
Disease resistant
Ripens 3 weeks after red delicious
Stores well, flavor improves in storage
Fuji.Fuji 
Very sweet, aromatic flavor
Yellow-green with red highlights 
Originated in Japan.
Best for: eating, salads, best applesauce apple
Late season
Gala.Gala 
Developed in New Zealand.  
Sweet, aromatic flavor
Best for: eating, salad, best applesauce apple
medium to smaller in size with a distinctive red and yellow striped heart-shaped appearance. 
Early to mid season
Ginger Gold.Ginger Gold 
Very slow to turn brown, so it's a great choice for apple slices.
Best for: eating, sauce, salad
Golden Delicious.Golden Delicious
Firm white flesh which retains its shape
Rich mild flavor when baked or cooked. 
Tender skin
Stays white longer when cut; 
Best for: salads, blend in applesauce
Early season
Grimes Golden
Firm white flesh which retains its shape
Rich mild flavor when baked or cooked. 
Tender skin, with a "grimy mottled surface"; (but there IS also Mr. Thomas Grimes, who developed the variety, see Wikipedia)
Stays white longer when cut; 
Best for: salads, blend in applesauce
Early season
Granny Smith.
Granny Smith
Very tart
Bright green appearance, crisp bite and tart apple flavor. 
Best for: people who like tart apples rather than sweet ones :-)
Mid to late season
Not good for applesauce unless you add sugar (or like a very tart applesauce)
 Gravenstein appleGravenstein
Greenish-yellow with a lumpy appearance
A good, all-purpose apple,
Good for applesauce and pies.
Hokuto
A Mutsu/Fuji cross
crisp texture of Fuji,
large size and shape of Mutsu,
sweet flavors
late mid-season
Honeycrisp
Introduced in Minnesota
Very sweet and aromatic
Great for juice, as it is a very juicy apple
Best for: Eating, pies, baking  
Mid season
 Jazz appleJazz
Cross between Royal Gala and Braeburn, developed in Australia
Very sweet, more flavor than Gala
Vewry good fresh eating and applesauce, apple butter
A "Club" variety, meaning licensed with limited commercial growing, first appeared on the shelves in 2004.
late ripening
 
Jonathan.
Jonathan
One of the first red apples of the falll
Sweet-tart taste with firm texturee
Light red stripes over yellow or deep redd
Best for: eating and cooking  
Early seasonn
JonaliciousJonalicious
Flavor like Jonathan but a little less tart and darker red skin. 
Larger, crisper, and juicier than Jonathan, and a better keeper.
Slightly sour/acid balance.
early midseason
Jonamac
A medium-sized Jonathan/McIntosh cross
Sour flavored, aromatic and tender fleshed like McIntosh.
Early season, a few days prior to McIntosh.
Poor keeper.
Jonagold *
A cross of Jonathan and Golden Delicious.
Best for: eating, sauce, pies, salad, baking  
Mid season
Jubilee
Best for: eating, sauce, pies, salad
Mid season
 keepsake appleKeepsake
Best for: baking, sauces or eating raw.
Small apple with a red outer skin and a cream colored fine textured flesh.
very sweet flavor with a high sugar content
 Liberty appleLiberty
A highly disease-resistant introduction from Geneva New York. 
Liberty has superior dessert quality, similar to one of its parents, Macoun
Best for: eating, sauce, salad
flavor improves in storage
late season
Macoun
Named after a famous fruit grower in Canada
Best for: eating, sauce, salad
Very good, sweet, all-around apple
McIntosh *
Popular in America since 1811
Best for: eating, sauce, salad, good as part of a blend for applesauce
Sweet, mild flavor
Melrose
The official apple of Ohio
Similar to a Jonathan but sweeter.
Good for pies: the slices hold together in pies
Keeps well
Mutsu
Lousy name, but a great apple
It is sweet and crisp
A lot like a Golden Delicious
Best for eating fresh and it makes a great applesauce
 Northern Spy appleNorthern Spy
Large, high quality fruit
Good for storage 
Mid-late season
PaulaRed
A tart apple with light to creamy flesh.
Good for eating, in pies and sauces.
Pink Lady
Rich red/pink color with white flesh
Very sweet and crisp
Best for eating and makes a naturally sweet, smooth applesauce and it is good in salads and pies.
A cross between a Golden Delicious and a Lady William. 
Late season
Red Delicious.Red Delicious  
WAS the most popular apple variety in the world! for December ades (now being replaced by Fuji and Gala)
Best for: eating, salad, very good  as a base apple for applesauce
Thin bright red skin with a mildly flavored fine-grained white flesh. 
Bruises easily and does not keep well.
Early to mid season
There are many, many varieties of red delicious, so there is a range of properties.  Not all red delicious are the same!

Rome
Best for:  baking and cooking - but not applesauce - not sweet enough, and it has a fairly bland flavor
Very smooth red apple with a slightly juicy flesh. 
Very hard flesh
Mid to late season
 Shizuka appleShizuka
A sister to Mutsu developed in Japan, with milder flavor.
Mid season.
 Spartan appleSpartan
A cross between the McIntosh and Pippin apples. 
Good all-purpose apple.
medium size and has a bright red blush, but can have background patches of greens and yellows.
 
Stayman
Stayman or Stayman-Winesap
Juicy, cream-colored to yellowish flesh with a tart wine-like flavor. (often also called winesap)
Good storing apple, bruise resistant, dull red coat. 
Best for: Cooking, pies and cider
Suncrisp
A hard tart, long keeping apple.
Red over orange color; Golden Delicious-type
Ripens late in the season
Best for: Baking, storing
 Sundance appleSundance
Sweet, tart yellow apple with reddish highlights
Late season
Good for eating frssh, applesauce
 SweeTango appleSweeTango
Similar to Honeycrisp
Ripens mid August - September
Developed at University of Minnesota
Tightly licensed
Winesap.
Winesapp
Rich red color with white flesh
Crisp texture and juicy
Best for cooking
 Yates appleYates
Mid to late season
 
Rich red color with white flesh
Sweet
Best for eating
Late season
Small

York.
YorkYork
Crisp and flavorful
"lop-sided" shape
Deep red with green streaks
Best for eating. holds texture during cooking and freezing
Images from the U.S. Apple Association (mostly)!
English Apple Varieties

These links take you to photos on GardenAction.co.uk
Bramley - The English gush over this apple with a fever (fevour?:) that borders on mania. It's basically a granny smith type, a higher acid content and lower sugar apple, with a stronger, more tangy taste. Bramley's are considered to be an ideal cooking apple.
Charles Ross
Crispin
Early Victoria
Early Worcester
Ellisons Orange
Epicure
Gibsons Scarlet
Golden Spire
Greensleaves
Howgate Wonder
Ingrid Marie
James Grieve
Jonagored
Jupiter
Katy
Orleans Reinette
Peasgood Nonsuch
Red Gravenstein
Red Victoria
Rev W. Wilks
Ribston Pippin
Rosemary Russett
Spartan
Sturmer Pippin
Sunset
Superb
Tydermans Late Orange
Warners King
Winston
 
More about apple varieties can be found:

University of Illinois Apple page
More Apple Varieties
Apple Photos
Over 100 photos of apple varieties
Apple photos and brief descriptions
Credits:
photos: 
Jonamac, Macoun, PaulaRed: Courtesy of New York Apple Association, © New York Apple Association
And if you are looking for shipping containers for apples and other fruit, see this page.
 