Apple Fruit with its Peels/Skins to Keep Chronic Diseases Away
Apple Fruit with its Peels Skins to Keep Chronic Diseases Away
Are you familiar with the popular phrase, "An apple a day keeps the doctor away."? Apple fruit may help fight chronic disease (heart disease, strokes, cancer, and more). Did you know that the best way to consume apple fruit is eating the fruit with its peels (apple skins)? The secret behind the super antioxidant capacity of the apple fruit is its peels. However, for a relatively small percentage of people, eating the apple skin may result in apple allergy. Let's learn more about the nutritional benefits of Apple Fruit as well as the Cons of Apple Fruit!

About Apple Fruit
Apple is the pomaceous fruit of the apple tree, species Malus domestica in the rose family (Rosaceae). The skin colour of Apple fruit can vary from red to green to yellow, with white or yellow flesh depending on the variety. The center of the fruit apple contains five carpels arranged in a five-point star, each carpel including one to three seeds. 

Apple Fruit Nutrition
Apple fruit nutrition facts. Apple fruit is an excellent source of antioxidant flavonoids, phytochemicals, polyphenolic compounds that can get rid of free radicals which damage body tissue and lead to heart disease, strokes and cancer. Some strong antioxidants found in apple fruit are quercetin, catechin, phloridzin, chlorogenic acid, and vitamin C. There are significant amounts of vitamin C in the apple skin. According to research, although the amount of vitamin C in 100 g of apples is only about 5.7 mg, the total antioxidant activity of 100gr of whole apple fruit (with the apple peel) was found to be equivalent to the antioxidant effect of about 1500 mg of vitamin C.

What vitamins does an Apple fruit have? In addition to vitamin C, apple also contains vitamin B-6, vitamin E, vitamin A, pantothenic acid, niacin, folic acid. About minerals, Apple fruit has also magnesium and potassium, two of the important minerals necessary for a healthy heart. Apple also contains galacturonic acid, which lowers the body's need for insulin. This may help diabetics treat their diabetes disease. Apple fruit is also a good source of dietary fiber.

Apple fruit Calories - How Many Calories in Apple fruit
Apple fruit calories 1 cup?
> There are approximately 57 calories in 1 cup of apple fruit and its skin.
> There are approximately 81 calories in one medium 2-1/2 inch apple fruit, fresh, raw, with peels.
> There are approximately 52 calories in 100g of apple fruit with peel.
> There are approximately 15 calories in 1 oz or 28g of apple fruit with skin.
> There are approximately 117 calories in 1 cup of Apple Juice (97% carbs, 2% fat, 1% protein)

How much fiber is in an apple fruit?
An apple fruit with peel has about 0.7 grams of fiber per ounce. A medium apple fruit (4.9 oz) has 3.3 grams of fiber. 

* The nutritional value of apples will vary slightly depending on the variety and size.

Apple Peels (apple skins) vs Apple Flesh Nutrition
Apple skin contains from two to six times (depending on the variety) the antioxidant activity than the apple flesh. Apple peels or apple skins have more antioxidant compounds, especially 'quercetin' (brings beneficial effects to fight heart disease and cancer). According to study, apple fruits without the apple peels had less antioxidant activity than apple fruits with the apple peels. Apple peels may provide higher antioxidant activity and higher bioactivity than the apple flesh. Almost half of the vitamin C content is just underneath the apple peel. Eating the peel also increases insoluble fiber content.

Apple peels contain procyanidins, catechin, phloridzin, quercetin conjugates, epicatechin, and chlorogenic acid. Apple flesh also includes some epicatechin, catechin, phloridzin, and procyanidin, but in much lower concentrations than in the apple peels. Chlorogenic acid tends to be higher in the apple flesh than in the apple peel (apple skin).

Note: Before eating an apple fruit with its apple skins / apple peels, especially for those who are allergic patients, please read this whole article till the Cons of Apple Fruit below.

Health Benefits of Apple Fruit
Apple fruit benefits
+ sodium-free, very low-fat
+ reduce LDL cholesterol while raising HDL cholesterol
+ magnesium and potassium to lower high blood pressure
+ phloridzin may help prevent bone loss associated with menopause
+ quercitin and catechin contains high concentration of anti-inflammatory flavonoids which is good for health
+ quercitin may protect brain cells from the kind of free radical damage that may lead to Alzheimer's disease
+ apples fruit may help prevent lung cancer, breast cancer, colon cancer, liver cancer
+ fight cardiovascular disease
+ help treat asthma, diabetes, cholera
+ prevent atherosclerosis
+ lower the risk of neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinsonism and Alzheimer’s
+ the fiber in the whole apple is good for weight loss
+ high amount of water increases fluid intake that helps to lower food cravings
+ phytonutrients help you regulate blood sugar
+ Vitamin B-6 helps to control the central nervous system
+ Vitamin E to fight free radicals and toxins, slowing the aging process of cells which is good for healthy skin and hair
+ Vitamin A a.k.a. retinol helps keep your eyes, skin and mucous membranes moist and has antioxidant properties that neutralize free radicals
+ Niacin helps prevent headaches and depression
+ Folic acid necessary for energy production and boosts the immune system

Cons of Apple Fruit
Apple allergy symptoms
- For a relatively small percentage of the human population (within the North of Europe), especially those who are birch pollen allergic patients, often have allergy to uncooked apple fruits or only to apple skins/peels. Cooked apples do not cause these symptoms as the heat denatures the proteins in the pollen. These patients should track their symptoms carefully and thoroughly and consult an allergy specialists. (The amount of allergen in the apple fruit depends on the apple variety, the degree of maturity and storage conditions.)
- The so called 'Oral allergy syndrome' is a secondary allergy caused when the body thinks its reacting to pollen but is actually reacting to enzymes in apple fruit. When they eat the raw apples, especially the apple skin, their mouth mistakes it for the pollen and they get hay fever (pollinosis) in their mouth. This allergic reaction to pollen usually irritates the upper respiratory tract and the eyes, resulting in symptoms including a runny and itchy nose, itchy and watering eyes, and sneezing. 
- If someone is allergic to apple fruits, this individual may also experience an allergic reaction with other fruits in the Rosaceae family, such as peaches, apricots, cherries, pears, plums. This person develops adverse reactions to apple fruit because of the similarity between the allergens in peach and apple fruit.
- Apple allergy is caused by one or more proteins in apple fruit (Mal d1- until Mal d4-proteins). Mal d1 is the most essential allergen in apple fruit. Those who are allergic to the Mal d1 protein feel swelling, tingling/stinging/prickling and an itching of the lips, tongue and throat after eating a fresh apple fruit.
- Apple fruit may also cause digestion problems, when the apple fruit makes its way through the digestive tract. It can result in vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal or stomach pain. Those with digestive disorders, such as Crohn's disease (chronic inflammatory disease) and diverticulitis, had better limit their intake of apple fruits because digesting apple peels can be hard to do and may result in a flare-up of symptoms.
- In very rare cases, apple allergies may induce anaphylaxis, a chronic allergic reaction that can be fatal. Those patients getting unconsciousness, trouble speaking due to anaphylactic reaction needs immediate hospitalization.

Apple Fruit Recipes
+ Eat fresh with peels to receive the benefits found in the skins. The peel of the apple fruit is where various pesticides and other contaminants accumulate, so you had better rinse your apples thoroughly. You can choose organic apples to avoid problems related to pesticide residues and other contaminants on the apple peels.
+ You can also drink "cloudy apple juice" by putting the apple fruits into a powerful blender. Commercial apple juices are in usual way either "clear" or "cloudy." Cloudy apple juice is better because of the pulpy apple solids.
+ Apple fruits could be added as an ingredient in many desserts, such as apple crumble, apple crisp, apple pie, baked apples, apple strudel, and apple cake. 
+ Apple fruits are also processed into dried apples, tinned apple sauce, apple slices, pasteurised apple juice, and apple cider vinegar.

Red delicious apple, gala apple, golden delicious apple, granny smith apple, red fuji apple, green apple, yellow apple, or whatever varieties, Apple fruit is still one of the best delicious healthy fruits. 