"An apple a day keeps the doctor away" is an old Welsh proverb that most of us are familiar with, but what makes this fruit so special? What health benefits are associated with eating apples?

As one of the most cultivated and consumed fruits in the world, apples are continuously being praised as a "miracle food".

In fact, apples were ranked first in Medical News Today's featured article "What Are The Top 10 Healthy Foods?"

Apples are extremely rich in important antioxidants, flavanoids, and dietary fiber.

The phytonutrients and antioxidants in apples may help reduce the risk of developing cancer, hypertension, diabetes, and heart disease.

This MNT Knowledge Center feature is part of a collection of articles on the health benefits of popular foods. It provides a nutritional breakdown of the fruit, its health benefits, risks and precautions and some frequently asked questions.
Apples deserve to be called "nutritional powerhouses". They contain the following important nutrients:

Vitamin C - a powerful natural antioxidant capable of blocking some of the damage caused by free radicals, as well as boosting the body's resistance against infectious agents, according to the University of Maryland Medical Center.1
B-complex vitamins (riboflavin, thiamin, and vitamin B-6) - these vitamins are key in maintaining red blood cells and the nervous system in good health.
Dietary fiber - the British National Health Service2 says that a diet high in fiber can help prevent the development of certain diseases and may help prevent the amount of bad cholesterol in your blood from rising.
Phytonutrients - apples are rich in polyphenolic compounds". These phytonutrients help protect the body from the detrimental effects of free radicals.3
Minerals such as calcium, potassium, and phosphorus.
Apples, with skin (edible parts) nutritional value per 100 grams
Energy - 52 kcal	Carbohydrates - 13.81 g
Fat - 0.17 g	Protein - 0.26 g
Water - 85.56 g	Sodium - 1 mg
Beta-carotene - 27 µg	Lutein and zeaxanthin - 29 µg
Thiamin (vitamin B1) - 0.017 mg	Vitamin A equiv - 3 µg
Riboflavin (vitamin B2) - 0.026 mg	Niacin (vitamin B3) - 0.091 mg
Pantothenic acid (vitamin B5) - 0.061 mg	Vitamin B6 - 0.041 mg
Folate (vitamin B9) - 3 µg	Vitamin C - 4.6 mg
Vitamin E - 0.18 mg	Vitamin K - 2.2 µg
Calcium - 6 mg	Iron - 0.12 mg
Magnesium - 5 mg	Manganese - 0.035 mg
Phosphorus - 11 mg	Potassium - 107 mg
Note: the average size of an apple is 150 grams
Source: USDA Health benefits of apples
A collection of research studies suggests that apples may well be one of the best foods people should add to their diet.

Apples can potentially:

Improve neurological health
Apples are good for neurological health. The fruit contains an antioxidant called "quercetin" which reduces cellular death caused by oxidation and inflammation of neurons, according to research conducted by G. Bureau and M. Martinoli at the University of Quebec.

Prevent dementia
Researchers at Cornell University conducted a study, published in the Journal of Food Science, which found evidence to suggest that apples may help "protect neuron cells against oxidative stress-induced neurotoxicity", which could reduce the risk of developing neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease.

Reduce your risk of stroke
A study involving 9,208 men and women showed that those who ate the most apples over a 28-year period had the lowest risk for stroke. The researchers concluded "the results suggest that the intake of apples is related to a decreased risk of thrombotic stroke."4

Lower levels of bad cholesterol
A group of researchers at The Florida State University stated that apples really are a "miracle fruit". They found that older women who ate apples everyday had 23% less bad cholesterol (LDL) and 4% more good cholesterol (HDL) after just six months.

Reduce the risk of diabetes
Apples could also help lower your risk of diabetes. A study involving 187,382 people found that people who ate three servings per week of apples, grapes, raisins, blueberries or pears had a 7% lower risk of developing type 2 diabetes compared to those who did not.

Ward off breast cancer
There is growing evidence suggesting that an apple a day may help prevent breast cancer, according to a series of studies conducted by prominent Cornell researcher Rui Hai Liu.

Liu said her research adds to "the growing evidence that increased consumption of fruits and vegetables, including apples, would provide consumers with more phenolics, which are proving to have important health benefits. I would encourage consumers to eat more and a wide variety of fruits and vegetables daily."

Recent developments on the benefits of apples from MNT news
An apple a day is just as effective as statins in preventing vascular death. Researchers from the University of Oxford in the UK found that eating an apple everyday could be just as effective as statins in preventing vascular deaths among people over 50.
Risks and precautions
No serious side effects are linked to apple consumption.

Apple seeds contain contain cyanide, a powerful poison. Eating too many apple seeds can potentially be fatal. Apple seeds should not be consumed.

In addition, because apples are fairly acidic, they could be up to four times more damaging to teeth than carbonated drinks, according to a study led by Professor David Bartlett at the King's Dental Institute.5

Professor Bartlett said that "snacking on acidic foods throughout the day is the most damaging, whilst eating them at meal times is much safer. It's not what you eat it's how you eat it - an apple a day is good, but taking all day to eat the apple can damage teeth."

Apples - three frequently asked questions
Should I eat the apple peel? - Most of the fiber and antioxidants are in the peel, says Dianne Hyson, Ph.D., R.D.6, a research dietitian at UC Davis in the Department of Internal Medicine.

What about pesticides on the peel? - Dr. Hyson says "Despite public misperceptions, laboratories have consistently found very low levels - if any - of pesticide residues on the skin of apples."

I have type 2 diabetes, can I eat apples? - According to the American Diabetes Association7, "Apples are a nutritious food and you can still eat them even if you have diabetes." The Association reminds people to eat the peel and advises on buying small apples (2.5 inches in diameter).

Written by Joseph Nordqvist

Reviewed by: Megan Ware, RDN, LD, registered dietitian and nutritionist

Copyright: Medical News Today
Not to be reproduced without permission.


