Harvesting and storing apples
Storing apples at home is convenient and, if done properly, 
can be economical. Home-grown fruit that otherwise may 
go to waste can be stored for several months. However, most 
homes are not equipped for proper apple storage. Unless 
you grow your own or have adequate storage facilities 
available, it is often a better buy to purchase fruit in small 
quantities that can be stored easily in the refrigerator.
Harvesting
Important keys to a long storage life for home-grown apples 
are picking at the proper time and storing correctly.
The best time to pick an apple cultivar may vary a week or 
more from year to year, depending on the time the tree is 
in bloom and the climatic conditions during the growing 
season. Cloudy, cool conditions or drought conditions tend 
to delay fruit maturity. The harvest time also depends on 
the apple cultivar. See PM 453, Fruit Cultivars for Iowa, for 
approximate harvest times for several apple cultivars.
Home-grown apples that will be stored should be harvested 
when they have reached minimum maturity but are not yet 
ripe. Mature apples are full-size and have a light straw or 
greenish-yellow undercolor. The undercolor is the “base” 
color beneath the red blush. The intensity of the red color is 
not an indicator of maturity. At minimum maturity, apples 
will be hard and crisp. They will have developed their 
characteristic fl avor but will be somewhat starchy.
Fruit does not die when harvested. It remains a living 
organism that continues to take in oxygen and give off 
carbon dioxide. After harvest, an apple no longer receives 
nutrients from the tree and, since it is still respiring, it must 
use the food it has stored over the growing season. As this 
food is gradually used up during storage, the sugar, starch, 
and acid content of the apple change. Eventually the tissue 
breaks down; the apple becomes mealy, and develops an 
“off” fl avor. Loss of water can cause the fruit to become 
rubbery. Proper apple storage preserves the quality of the 
fruit by slowing ripening and reducing water loss.
Storing
The length of time apples remain good in storage depends 
on the apple cultivars, stage of maturity at picking, handling 
before storage, how soon they are cooled down, and the 
temperature and humidity of the storage area.
If large quantities are to be stored for an extended period 
of time, selecting the proper cultivar is important. Some 
cultivars will keep quite well if stored under the proper 
conditions, while others will not. Most early ripening 
cultivars, such as Lodi, are good for immediate use but 
have a very short storage life. Red Delicious, and Golden 
Delicious are considered good storage apples (see table).
Storage life of several apple cultivars at 
30-32°F. and 90-95 percent relative humidity
Cultivar Storage life
Lodi 1-2 weeks
Wealthy 3-10 weeks
Cortland 3-4 months
McIntosh 3-4 months
Golden Delicious 3-5 months
Jonathan 3-5 months
Red Delicious 3-5 months
Chieftain 3-6 months
Sort the apples that are to be stored. Remove any that are 
bruised, cut, or show signs of decay. Plan to consume the 
larger fruit of any cultivar fi rst, saving the smaller ones for 
later in the season. The larger apples are usually the fi rst to 
lose their quality and show signs of internal breakdown.
Low temperature slows the respiration rate and preserves 
good quality. Apples last several times longer at 32°F than 
they do at 70°F. Most apple cultivars should be stored 
at 30 to 32°F for optimum storage. However, McIntosh 
apples should be kept around 36°F. If possible, the 
storage temperature should remain constant. The freezing 
temperature of apples is 27.8 to 29.4°F, so it is best not to 
store apples in unheated locations where the temperature 
may get too low. Once thawed, frozen apples deteriorate 
quickly, resulting in softening of fl esh and loss of texture.
Relative humidity must be kept high, between 90 and 
95 percent, in a fruit storage area. If the humidity is not 
maintained, apples dehydrate and shrivel, particularly 
Golden Delicious.
Apples can be kept well in humid cellars that maintain a 
cool temperature below 40°F. They also can be stored in 
unheated outbuildings or garages, in Styrofoam chests, or 
with hay or other insulating materials piled around them to 
prevent them from freezing.
Apples should be kept in containers lined and covered with 
polyethylene to help retain the humidity.
PM 1078 Revised September 2008Storing small quantities
Unfortunately, most homes are not equipped for proper 
apple storage. It may not be economically wise to buy large 
quantities of apples unless proper storage is available or the 
fruit will be used in a short period of time.
Small quantities of apples are usually sold in perforated 
plastic bags. Storing the fruit in these or similar bags in 
a cool refrigerator will greatly reduce the respiration rate 
and the fruit should remain fi rm and crisp until used. The 
atmosphere inside the plastic bags is usually quite humid, 
whereas the atmosphere of the refrigerator has a lower 
humidity that tends to pull moisture out of the fruit, causing 
it to shrivel. The holes in the bags eliminate the buildup of 
carbon dioxide and excess moisture inside the plastic bags. 
Apples also can be stored in unperforated polyethylene 
bags. However, the bags should not be tied shut. After the 
fruit has cooled down, the open ends should be folded over.
If an old, operating refrigerator is available, it can be used to 
store larger quantities of apples. However, the fruit should 
be kept in plastic bags to prevent drying out. Check the 
refrigerator’s temperature setting before using it for fruit 
storage. Many refrigerators are designed to compensate for 
being opened several times a day, and if the door is opened 
only a few times a week, the temperature may go below 
freezing.
Storage disorders of apples
Apples may develop physiological disorders in storage. 
Several of the problems can be controlled by altering the 
harvest period or modifying the storage environment.
Scald
Scald is a serious storage disorder of apples, occurring most 
often on apples that are picked at their minimum maturity. 
Scald is caused by the buildup of volatile gases just under 
the skin.
Soft scald affects all apple cultivars. It appears as blister-like 
or burnt areas over the skin. These are often brown and 
slightly sunken. The fl esh beneath these areas is usually soft 
and slightly discolored. 
Harvest fruit at minimum maturity if scald has been a 
problem. If scald persists on a cultivar, the fruit can be 
individually wrapped in newspaper that has been lightly 
misted with mineral oil.
Water core
Water core is a disorder that can develop in the fi eld, in 
storage, or it can develop in the fi eld and disappear in 
storage. Its occurrence is infl uenced by environmental 
conditions. Apples that are exposed to the sun and develop 
a high internal temperature during the day are more 
susceptible. Water core develops in the area around the 
vascular bundles of the core line. The cells in this area will 
have a glossy appearance. A water core apple tastes sweeter 
than one not showing the symptoms, and with some 
cultivars the fruit will develop a slight “off” fl avor.
Water core is a sign of overmaturity and is prevalent in Red 
Delicious apples when they are left on the tree to develop 
a deeper red color. To prevent water core, harvest the fruit 
early, at minimum stages of maturity. 
Jonathan spot
This disorder is most prevalent on Jonathan apples but 
will occur on other cultivars as well. It is a skin disorder 
associated with the lenticels (tiny dots on the skin of 
apples). The skin around the lenticels develops dark 
colored, sunken spots. This occurs on fruits when stored for 
an extended period, or earlier on fruits that were harvested 
late. The dark colored side of fruit is more susceptible to 
Jonathan spot than the shaded side.
Harvest fruit as soon as it reaches minimum maturity and 
place it in cold storage immediately. Maintain the storage 
temperature at the optimum.
Internal browning
Internal browning shows up as brown streaks in the 
fl esh, radiating out from the core. It is a symptom of low 
temperature injury. It is prevalent in McIntosh when 
stored at or near 32°F. It can be controlled by storing these 
cultivars at 38°F.
Internal breakdown
This browning or discoloration of the fl esh indicates the 
end of the normal storage life of the fruit. Usually the fi rst 
symptoms show in larger fruit. Internal breakdown can be 
caused by overmature fruit at harvest, a delay in getting the 
fruit cooled down, a high storage temperature, or too long 
in storage.
Alternatives to fresh storage
Often it is impossible to consume or store all the apples 
produced in the backyard orchard. Drying, freezing, 
and canning are alternative storage methods. How-to 
information is available in these publications:
PM 1045, Freezing Fruits and Vegetables
PM 1043, Canning Fruits and Tomatoes
Additional information and publications are available at 
these Web sites.
www.extension.iastate.edu/store
www.extension.iastate.edu/healthynutrition/food/preservation
Originally prepared by Linda Naeve, extension associate, and Paul A. 
Domoto, professor of horticulture.
File: Hort and LA 2-3, FN 8
… and justice for all 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its 
programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, gender, religion, 
age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status. (Not 
all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Many materials can be made available in 
alternative formats for ADA clients. To fi le a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, 
Offi ce of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, 
SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call 202-720-5964.
Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, Acts of May 8 and June 30, 
1914 in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Jack M. Payne, director, 
Cooperative Extension Service, Iowa State University of Science and Technology, 
Ames, Iowa.