Six tips for taking better iPhone photos
Camera phones can be limiting but they can also be liberating, and they are always to hand. Follow these six simple tips to get better results from your iPhone's camera
Apple also uses sapphire glass in the protective cover over the iPhone's camera sensor.
The latest iPhone 6 camera being discussed at Apple's launch event earlier this year Photo: AP

By Matthew Sparkes, Deputy Head of Technology

4:00PM GMT 14 Nov 2014

CommentsComments
Use the camera grid

The "rule of thirds" is a theory that images are more aesthetically appealing when the main subject lies one third of the way across, and down, your image - it makes an image more interesting than if you put the subject square in the middle. To help you with this there is an option to place a grid of thirds over your viewfinder screen. The button to turn this on isn’t found in the camera app itself but rather the “Photos & Camera” tab in the settings app.

It also has a bonus effect - the straight line helps put an end to images with distracting wonky horizons.

Boost the contrast

High Dynamic Range (HDR) is a feature that quickly takes three photos with different settings and combines them in order to get better contrast. This prevents parts of your image being over and under exposed. For instance, you could take a picture from inside a car on a sunny day and the interior of the car and the bright sky would both be visible. With a normal picture you would either find the sky washed out or the car a black smudge.

It gets an unfair reputation for producing overly dramatic shots that look digitally manipulated, but the iPhone does a relatively subtle job. Turn it on by tapping the "HDR on" option in the camera app. After you press the shutter you'll have to wait a second or two for the processor to combine the images into one.
Related Articles

    What will Apple Watch do?: in pictures
    19 Nov 2014

    Next iPhone will have 'DSLR quality' camera
    19 Nov 2014

Don’t zoom

Often you'll find yourself some distance from what you want to photograph, and it's tempting to use the zoom. Don't. The iPhone comes with a digital zoom only, meaning that all you do when you zoom in is crop your image - no extra information is recorded. So while the subject that was filling only a tiny fraction of your image is now filling the whole photo, it'll be grainy and washed-out.

With a larger, dedicated camera you may have an optical zoom that could get you closer to the action. But on a phone camera the only way to do this is literally get closer to the action - get nearer to your subject.
Unusual angles

While phone cameras are limiting in some ways, they're liberating in others. Their small size allows you to easily get creative shots. Most images are taken at shoulder height simply because that's where it feels most natural to hold a camera. Get inventive with your angles: shoot from low down or high up. The results can be much more interesting.

Take a few shots

A lot of phone photography comes down to luck, and you're three or four times more likely to get lucky if you take three or four photographs. Once you've got your phone out and composed a picture, you may as well press the shutter button a few times. Maybe in one of them all your subjects will even have their eyes open at the same time.

Wipe the lens

Unlike an expensive camera, which gets treated with kid gloves and placed in its own padded bag with a proper lens cover, your phone just gets shoved in a pocket or handbag. Consequently, the lens is likely to get a bit mucky. Get in the habit of giving it a wipe with a tie, soft corner of clothing or napkin before you take a shot and you'll find your photographs much clearer.