Keeping our data from prying eyes is fine – but not if it helps jihadists to spread their poison
Guidelines indicate the security services have been targeting communications between lawyers and their clients for years
Robert Hannigan, the director of GCHQ headquarters in Cheltenham, pictured, said internet services had become the 'command and control networks of choice' for terrorists and serious criminals Photo: PA
Con Coughlin

By Con Coughlin

8:52PM GMT 14 Nov 2014

CommentsComments

In the global campaign against Islamist terrorism, intelligence agencies need all the help they can get. The threat posed by these terror cells has grown beyond all recognition from its modest beginnings in the Nineties when Osama bin Laden’s itinerant band of al-Qaeda followers initiated their campaign against the West. These days, supporters of organisations such as Islamic State (Isil) not only control large swathes of territory in Iraq, Syria and Libya, but they are also part of a global jihadist network that has proved to be highly adept at exploiting modern communications technology to spread its vile creed.

Thus organisations such as MI5 and MI6 must be at the top of their game if they are to prevent a repeat of the July 7 attacks in 2005, in which 52 innocent civilians died and more than 700 were injured. And to judge from the recent flurry of arrests on the basis of material gathered by the intelligence and security services, the British authorities appear to be enjoying some success in averting potential terror plots, though the current threat level is still at “severe”.

Last month, the police claimed to have broken up the UK’s first Isil-related plot, in which a group of recently returned jihadists from Syria were said to be planning drive-by shootings at military bases. This week, tougher security measures across the country meant that Remembrance ceremonies passed without incident, despite warnings of potential terrorist attacks.

But as any professional intelligence officer will tell you, it only takes one man to slip through the net for the nation to find itself having to deal with the aftermath of a major atrocity.

Last year’s brutal murder of Fusilier Lee Rigby outside the Royal Artillery Barracks in Woolwich is a case in point. The long-awaited report of the investigation into the killing by the Intelligence and Security Committee (ISC), which is due to be published next week, is said to have concluded that, while one of Mr Rigby’s murderers was known to MI5, security officers did not deem him to be a high enough risk to monitor his activities closely. According to the ISC, one of the reasons Michael Adebolajo, now serving a life prison term, wasn’t identified as a potential threat was because overseas internet companies had failed to flag up signs of worrying conduct.
Related Articles

    What will Apple Watch do?: in pictures
    19 Nov 2014

    Terrorists and criminals are being 'airbrushed from history', Sajid Javid warns
    11 Nov 2014

    Google robot performs Karate Kid kick
    11 Nov 2014

    Art on demand makes emperors of us all
    08 Nov 2014

    Tech giants reject GCHQ call for deal with government
    04 Nov 2014

    Peak District joins Google Street View: in pictures
    06 Nov 2014

Given that MI5 officers had frequent contact with Adebolajo, and may even have attempted to recruit him as an agent, the service is likely to face accusations that, once again, it has let slip a potential suspect who has then gone on to commit a gruesome act of terrorism. The service faced similar accusations over the July 7 bombings in London when it transpired that two of the suicide bombers were known to MI5 officers, but were not deemed to pose a serious threat.

But while the service will inevitably face calls to improve its assessment procedures for potential terror suspects, the fact that tech companies such as Google and Apple are proving reluctant to share data certainly makes the task of monitoring global jihadist networks a great deal harder. The trouble is, in the wake of revelations by Edward Snowden, the American whistleblower, about the mass surveillance techniques used by intelligence agencies, tech firms are under pressure to reassure customers that sensitive personal data is fully protected from prying eyes. To that end some have already improved their encryption security, with the result that, as appears to have happened with Adebolajo, security officials were unable to spot vital clues about his murderous intentions.

If that really is the case, then these companies need to have a serious rethink about their non-cooperation policy. Reassuring customers is all very well, but not if it means having the blood of innocent victims of terrorism on your hands.